design: add a proposal to support view feature (#8061)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2018-10-24-view-support.md

> # Proposal: Implement View Feature

Reviewer: It should also be put in `README`.

- Author(s):     AndrewDi
- Last updated:  2018-10-24
- Discussion at: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/7974

## Abstract
This proposal proposes to implement view feature in TiDB, aimed to make sql more easy to write.

## Background
A database view is a searchable object in a database that is defined by a query.  Though a view doesn’t store data, some refer to a views as “virtual tables,” you can query a view like you can a table.  A view can combine data from two or more table, using joins, and also just contain a subset of information.  This makes them convenient to abstract, or hide, complicated queries.

Below is a visual depiction of a view:

>   ![AnatomyOfAview](./view.png)

Reviewer 2: Now you can move it to `imgs` subdirectory

Author: fine

>   ![AnatomyOfAview](.imgs/view.png)

Reviewer: The link address should be `imgs/view.png`.

  
A view is created from a query using the CREATE OR REPLACE VIEW command.In the example below we are creating a PopularBooks view based of a query which selects all Books that have the IsPopular field checked.  Following is the query:
`CREATE OR REPLACE VIEW PopularBooks AS SELECT ISBN, Title, Author,PublishDate FROM Books WHERE IsPopular=1`  

Once a view is created you can used then as you would any table in a SELECT statement.  For example, to list all the popular book titles ordered by author you could write:  
`SELECT Author, Title FROM PopularBooks ORDER BY Author`  

In general you can use any of the SELECT clauses, such as GROUP BY, in a select statement containing a view.

## Proposal

> I implement `create or replace` command to create view with select statement, currently I reuse `drop table` to drop a view,`show full tables` can also display view list with different table types.`show create table` command can also regenerated a view create command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I implement the `create or replace` command to create a view with the SELECT statement. Currently, I reuse `drop table` to drop a view, and `show full tables` can also display the view list with different table types. The `show create table` command can also regenerate a view create command.
```

> I implement the `create or replace` command to create a view with the SELECT statement. Currently, I reuse `drop table` to drop a view, and `show full tables` can also display the view list with different table types. The `show create table` command can also regenerate a view create command.

Reviewer 4: 1. This is the restrictions on the `View` in MySQL 5.7, which should be considered as well: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/view-restrictions.html

2. Please describe in detail that how to process a query on a View. 

3. I noticed that you store the original text of the view, maybe it's not proper, because in MySQL: 
	> The view definition is “frozen” at creation time and is not affected by subsequent changes to the definitions of the underlying tables. For example, if a view is defined as SELECT * on a table, new columns added to the table later do not become part of the view, and columns dropped from the table will result in an error when selecting from the view.

	ref: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/create-view.html

Reviewer 4: And as you can see in the view creation, we should also check the privileges. This part should also be described in detail.

ref: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/create-view.html

Reviewer 4: We should also store the view definition into the `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEW` table, please take a look at this: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/views-table.html document.

Reviewer 4: Also, the updatable and insertable views should also be considered: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/view-updatability.html

Author: @zz-jason add more detail into document.

## Rationale

> This proposal has no effect on the rationale.

Reviewer 3: I think this part is for introducing the rationale of your proposal.

## Compatibility

> This proposal has no effect on the compatibility.

Reviewer: It makes tidb more compatible with MySQL.

Author: Aha, very well.

## Implementation

> First we need to introduce `TableType` for `TableInfo`, currently I define two kind of table, which is `BaseTable` and `View`,by default if we use `CREATE TABLE` command to create a table ,TiDB create a BaseTable `TableInfo`,if we use `CREATE VIEW` command to a create a table,TiDB create a View `TableInfo`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, we need to introduce `TableType` for `TableInfo`. Currently, I define two kinds of tables, which are `BaseTable` and `View`, by default if we use the `CREATE TABLE` command to create a table, TiDB creates a BaseTable `TableInfo`; if we use the `CREATE VIEW` command to create a table, TiDB creates a View `TableInfo`.
```

> In order to store the VIEW's select text,we also need to add attribute `ViewSelectStmt string json:"view_select_stmt"` store select statement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to store the VIEW's select text, we also need to add attribute `ViewSelectStmt string json:"view_select_stmt"` store select statement.
```

Following is the main implementation details:  
1. ast/ddl.go  

> I do check both view name and select statement,viewname is a tablename object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I do check both the view name and the SELECT statement, viewname is a tablename object.
```

2. planner/core/planbuilder.go  

> The code execute select and return `expression.columns` within `plan.Schema()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The code executes SELECT and returns `expression.columns` within `plan.Schema()`.
```

3. ddl_api.go  
We convert `expression.columns` into `table.Column` and reuse function `buildTableInfo` to build view
4. logical_plan_builder.go  

> Everytime we select from a view,convert view to select `LogicalPlan` and return.

Reviewer 3: Every time we select ??? from a view, ??? converts a view to select `LogicalPlan` and returns ???
I use ??? to indicate something missing in this sentence.

Below is a visual depiction of a view:
  ![AnatomyOfAview](imgs/view.png)
  
A view is created from a query using the CREATE OR REPLACE VIEW command. In the example below we are creating a PopularBooks view based on a query which selects all Books that have the IsPopular field checked. Following is the query:
`CREATE OR REPLACE VIEW PopularBooks AS SELECT ISBN, Title, Author,PublishDate FROM Books WHERE IsPopular=1`  

Once a view is created, you can use it as you query any table in a SELECT statement. For example, to list all the popular book titles ordered by an author, you could write:  
`SELECT Author, Title FROM PopularBooks ORDER BY Author`  

In general you can use any of the SELECT clauses, such as GROUP BY, in a select statement containing a view.

## Proposal
I implement the `CREATE OR REPLACE` command to create a view with the SELECT statement. Currently, I reuse `DROP TABLE` to drop a view, and `show full tables` can also display the view list with different table types. The `show create table` command can also regenerate a view create command.

## Rationale

> View is just a tableinfo object store with select statement, view only support two types ddl operation, which are `CREATE` and `DROP`. Currently, view can only used within `SELECT` statement.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
View is just a tableinfo object store with a `SELECT` statement, and only supports two types of DDL operations, which are `CREATE` and `DROP`. Currently, view can only be used within the `SELECT` statement.  
```

> Let me describe some more detail about view ddl operation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let me describe more details about the view DDL operation:
```

1. Create a VIEW  

>   1.1 Parse the create view statement and build a logical plan for select cause part, if any grammar error occur, return errors to parser.   

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  1.1 Parse the create view statement and build a logical plan for select cause part. If any grammar error occurs, return errors to parser.   
```

>   1.2 Examine view definer's privileges, definer should own both `CREATE_VIEW` and base table's `SELECT` privileges.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  1.2 Examine view definer's privileges. Definer should own both `CREATE_VIEW` and base table's `SELECT` privileges.  
```

  1.3 If `ViewFieldList` cause is empty, then we should generate view column name from `SelectStmt` cause.  
  1.4 Replace any wildcard with column name in `SELECT` cause.  
  1.5 Test `SELECT` cause with some rules to see if this view is updateable.  
  1.6 Store the view definition into following tables

>      * `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEW_COLUMN_USAGE`  Lists one row for each column in a view including the base table of the column where possible 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     * `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEW_COLUMN_USAGE` lists one row for each column in a view including the base table of the column where possible 
```

>      * `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEW_TABLE_USAGE`  Lists one row for each table used in a view 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     * `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEW_TABLE_USAGE` lists one row for each table used in a view 
```

>      * `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEWS` Lists one row for each view

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     * `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.VIEWS` lists one row for each view
```

      
2. Drop a view  

>   Implement DROP VIEW grammer, delete exist view tableinfo object.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Implement DROP VIEW grammar, and delete the existing view tableinfo object.  
```

3. Select from a view  
  3.1 In function `func (b *PlanBuilder) buildDataSource(tn *ast.TableName) (LogicalPlan, error)`, if `tn *ast.TableName` is a view, then we build a select logicalplan from view's view_select string.   
4. Insert/Update into a view  

>   I do not have any idea now, will implement later.   

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  I do not have any idea now, and will implement later.   
```

5. Describe a view  

>   Generate the view select logicalplan, if any error occur return error to parser. Otherwise return `SELECT` cause's column infos.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Generate the view select logicalplan. If any error occurs, return the error to parser. Otherwise, return `SELECT` cause's column info.
```

## Compatibility

> It makes tidb more compatible with MySQL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It makes TiDB more compatible with MySQL.
```

## Implementation

> First, we need to introduce `TableType` for `TableInfo`. Currently, I define two kinds of tables, which are `BaseTable` and `View`, by default if we use the `CREATE TABLE` command to create a table, TiDB creates a BaseTable `TableInfo`; if we use the `CREATE VIEW` command to create a table, TiDB creates a View `TableInfo`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, we need to introduce `TableType` for `TableInfo`. Currently, I define two kinds of tables, which are `BaseTable` and `View`. By default if we use the `CREATE TABLE` command to create a table, TiDB creates a BaseTable `TableInfo`; if we use the `CREATE VIEW` command to create a table, TiDB creates a View `TableInfo`.
```

In order to store the VIEW's select text, we also need to add attribute `ViewSelectStmt string json:"view_select_stmt"` store select statement.

Following is the main implementation details:  
1. ast/ddl.go  
I do check both the view name and the SELECT statement, viewname is a tablename object.
2. planner/core/planbuilder.go  
The code executes SELECT and returns `expression.columns` within `plan.Schema()`.
3. ddl_api.go  
We convert `expression.columns` into `table.Column` and reuse function `buildTableInfo` to build view
4. logical_plan_builder.go  

> Everytime when we make a select statement within a view, modify buildDataSource function to rewrite view table to select `LogicalPlan`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every time we make a `SELECT` statement within a view, modify the `buildDataSource` function to rewrite the view table to select `LogicalPlan`.
```
